.. post:: Aug 27, 2016
   :tags: typo3, docs, marketing
   :excerpt: 1

.. _documentation-marketing:

Documentation marketing
=======================

During my contributions in the area of documentation it turns out most developers have so much fun
while developing new features. In the end they are proud of their new product, but don't provide
documentation for their users. Users can be further developers extending the original product via an
API, or the user interacting with the product via a GUI or CLI. Sometimes they promote their new
product, e.g. a new feature. They write a Blog post, tweet about it, talk on conferences, and so on.
But no one else can inform himself about the features and much more important if he once get
interested, how to use the product or feature.

Some projects already have one type of documentation called "release notes". Everything that is new
will be documented beside the whole documentation. That's better then nothing, but it's incremental,
you have to know that something has changed to look it up. Also you need to know the context around
the change. The target audience are your existing users.

But the most important target audience are the users not using your product right now, but that will
make a decision whether to use your product in the future. They will take a look at the official
documentation.

If you don't update or provide an understandable, up to date documentation, how should they know
about the features? How should they know how to use features and how hard it will be? Of course we
have tests nowadays, but that's not the same. You need much more time to get into tests, that's why
we have documentation.

Documentation is like performance, you should not put it in top, but into your definition of done.
It's mandatory if someone should use your product. And in case of products like TYPO3, it's the same
as with software like Sublime Text. The software itself is not the point while selling, but the
ecosystem. And that heavily depends on the documentation. As with no documentation, your ecosystem
will develop less.

Examples
--------

In my opinion one reason why Symfony is so widely used is there documentation, same is true for
Drupal.

Symfony features there documentation right on `start page <https://symfony.com/>`_ as second
navigation item and third item on the page.

.. figure:: /images/2016/08-27-documentation-marketing/symfony.png
   :align: center

   Symfony start page with documentation highlighted in red.

Drupal also covers documentation on his `start page <https://www.drupal.org/>`_ as third navigation
item and as third item on the page.

.. figure:: /images/2016/08-27-documentation-marketing/drupal.png
   :align: center

   Drupal start page with documentation highlighted in red.

So please do yourself, and the world a favour and provide the necessary documentation. The ecosystem
is well documented and easy to use, as you can see at my Blog post
:ref:`post-readthedocs-sphinx-plantuml`.

Further reading
---------------

You might also be interested in :ref:`post-readthedocs-sphinx-plantuml`.

Even if I found this out myself, I'm not the only one with this opinion, check out `5 Reasons your
product documentation is a marketing asset by Mashable
<http://mashable.com/2011/08/12/product-documentation-marketing/>`_.
