.. post:: Nov 05, 2018
   :tags: typo3, mbox
   :excerpt: 2

How to use mbox with TYPO3 CMS
==============================

From time to time you need to test some email within your TYPO3 installation. Whether
it might be that you are a developer sending some mail via a CommandController or
Plugin, or you are an integrator configuring EXT:powermail or EXT:form to deliver
some mail.

In all cases you need to make sure this mail is not send to external addresses like
your customer during development and testing. Also you need to be able to check the
content of the mail. In this blog post you will learn what mbox is and how to use it.

What's mbox?
------------

Accordingly to Wikipedia:

   Mbox is a generic term for a family of related file formats used for holding
   collections of email messages, […]

   All messages in an mbox mailbox are concatenated and stored as plain text in a
   single file. […]

   […] the format used for the storage of email has never been formally defined
   through the RFC standardization mechanism […] In 2005 finally, the
   application/mbox media type was standardized as `RFC 4155`_, and hints that mbox
   stores mailbox messages in their original Internet Message (`RFC 2822`_) format, […]

   — https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mbox

So mbox does not introduce any dependency at all, it's just a plain text file in your
filesystem. Stored mail can be checked with any editor you feel comfortable with.
Beside a plain editor, thanks due the RFC existing Mail clients are able to read the
stored mails. This way it's possible to open mails with an existing desktop GUI for
inspection.

Setup TYPO3
-----------

TYPO3 provides an `API to deliver emails`_. It's a small wrapper around the `Swift
Mailer`_ library. Every email send through this API is delivered accordingly to the
configuration of TYPO3. This makes it possible to send all mails via an SMTP or some
other mail system. But it's also possible to use mbox as an alternative.

To use mbox as mail delivery within TYPO3, the following two options have to be set,
e.g. within :file:`AdditionalConfiguration.php`::

    $GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['MAIL']['transport'] = 'mbox';
    $GLOBALS['TYPO3_CONF_VARS']['MAIL']['transport_mbox_file'] = '/path/to/mbox/file';

Within :file:`typo3/sysext/core/Configuration/DefaultConfigurationDescription.yaml`
the option ``transport_mbox_file`` is documented:

   The file where to write the mails into. This file will be conforming the mbox
   format described in `RFC 4155`_. It is a simple text file with a concatenation of all
   mails. Path must be absolute.

Once the options are configured, you could use the "Environment" backend module to
"Test Mail Setup", which was located inside the Install Tool prior CMS v9. The Mail
should be send and the file should be created by TYPO3 containing the example mail.

Setup E-Mail client
-------------------

Not every client works with mbox files:

For command line there is the "mail" utility, e.g. within the `mailutils debian package`_ or on macOS.
   Call ``mail /path/to/mbox/file`` to open all available mails.

Also on command line available is the mail client `mutt`_ and `neomutt`_.
   Call the program with path to the mbox file.

For desktop clients, `Thunderbird`_ will do the job.
   Create a symlink to the mbox file within the Thunderbird profile. E.g. under
   Ubuntu 18.04 this can be done by calling:

   .. code-block:: bash

      ln -s "/path/to/mbox/file" "/home/<username>/.thunderbird/<profileFolder>/Mail/Local Folders"

   An concrete example:

   .. code-block:: bash

      ln -s ~/Projects/mbox/typo3-example.mbox "/home/daniels/.thunderbird/j30pjbfz.default/Mail/Local Folders"

   After the link was created, restart Thunderbird and you should see the mbox file
   in the bottom left of available mail accounts inside "Local Folders".

There might be further clients available I'm not aware of, just contact me and I'll
add them.

Further thoughts
----------------

Since mbox is just plain text one could easily integrate this for functional testing
within a test suite, without the need to run any other software.

Also as the file can be opened with desktop mail clients, Frontend developers are
able to "real world" test the output and styling. Contrary to solutions like
`MailHog`_ or `MailCatcher`_ the rendering happens inside the client and not a
browser.

Further reading
---------------

- TYPO3 documentation about emails:
  https://docs.typo3.org/typo3cms/CoreApiReference/ApiOverview/Mail/Index.html

- Reading an mbox file with Thunderbird - Berkeley Lab Commons:
  https://commons.lbl.gov/display/~jwelcher@lbl.gov/Reading+an+mbox+file+with+Thunderbird

.. _Swift Mailer: https://packagist.org/packages/swiftmailer/swiftmailer
.. _RFC 4155: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4155
.. _RFC 2822: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2822
.. _mailutils debian package: https://packages.debian.org/stretch/mailutils
.. _mutt: http://www.mutt.org/
.. _neomutt: https://neomutt.org/
.. _thunderbird: https://www.thunderbird.net/
.. _MailHog: https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog
.. _MailCatcher: https://mailcatcher.me/
.. _API to deliver emails: https://docs.typo3.org/typo3cms/CoreApiReference/ApiOverview/Mail/Index.html
